Computer Science & Engineering –R22
Operating Systems (D55PC13)
B.Tech V Semester LTPC
 3003
Course Objective
 To understand the basic components of a computer operating system, scheduling
polices, process synchronization, deadlocks, memory management strategies and
file system implementation.
Course Outcomes
After completion of the course the student will be able to,
1. Identify the components, structure, OS services and analyze the role of an Operating
System in developing software applications. L3
2. Make use of the concepts of CPU scheduling, including scheduling criteria and inter
process communication, and apply them to solve scheduling problems. L3
3. Apply synchronization techniques to coordinate access to shared resources among
concurrent processes and various mechanisms to detect and recovery the deadlocks.
L3
4. Analyze memory management and virtual memory management strategies and their
significance in modern computing environments. L4
5. Make use of the structure of file system and principles of protection to develop
secure, efficient and reliable computing environments. L3.
UNIT – I
Overview Introduction-Operating system objectives, User view, System view, Operating
system definition, Computer System Architecture, OS Structure, OS Operations, Process
Management, Memory Management, Storage Management, Protection and Security,
Computing Environments. Operating System services, User and OS Interface, System Calls,
Types of System Calls, System Programs, Operating System Design and Implementation, OS
Structure.
UNIT – II
CPU Scheduling Process concepts-The Process, Process State, Process Control Block,
Threads, Process Scheduling, Scheduling Queues, Schedulers, Context Switch, Operations on
Processes, System calls fork(),exec(),wait(),exit(), Inter-process communication-ordinary
pipes and named pipes, message queues, shared memory in Unix.
Process Scheduling-Basic concepts, Scheduling Criteria, Scheduling algorithms, MultipleProcessor Scheduling, Real Time Scheduling, Thread scheduling, Linux scheduling and
Windows scheduling.
CSE R22

UNIT – III
Process Synchronization, Background, The Critical Section Problem, Peterson’s solution,
Synchronization Hardware, Semaphores, Classic Problems of Synchronization, Monitors,
Synchronization in Linux and Windows.
Deadlocks-System Model, Deadlock Characterization, Methods for Handling Deadlocks,
Deadlock Prevention, Deadlock Avoidance, Deadlock Detection, and Recovery from
Deadlock.
UNIT – IV
Memory Management Background, Swapping, Contiguous Memory Allocation,
Segmentation, Paging, Structure of Page Table.
Virtual Memory Management Background, Demand Paging, Copy-on-Write, Page
Replacement, Page Replacement Algorithms, Allocation of Frames, Thrashing, Virtual
memory in Windows.
UNIT – V
Storage Management File System- Concept of a File, System calls for file operations –
open (), read (), write (), close (), seek (), unlink (), Access methods, Directory and Disk
Structure, File System Mounting, File Sharing.
File System Implementation File System Structure, File System Implementation, Directory
Implementation, Allocation methods, Free-space Management, Efficiency, and Performance,
Overview of Mass Storage Structure.
Protection System Protection, Goals of Protection, Principles of Protection, Domain of
Protection, Access Matrix, Implementation of Access Matrix, Access Control, Revocation of
Access Rights, Capability-Based Systems, Language-Based Protection.
Text Books
1. Operating System Concepts, Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B. Galvin, Greg Gagne,
 8
th Edition, Wiley, 2016 India Edition.
2. Operating Systems – Internals and Design Principles, W. Stallings, 7th Edition,
 Pearson.
Reference Books
1. Modern Operating Systems, Andrew S Tanenbaum, 3rd Edition, PHI
2. Operating Systems A concept-based Approach, 2nd Edition, D.M. Dhamdhere,
3. Principles of Operating Systems, B. L. Stuart, Cengage learning, India Edition,
 TMH.
4. An Introduction to Operating Systems, P.C.P. Bhatt, PHI.
5. Principles of Operating systems, Naresh Chauhan, Oxford University Press.